#"Doch sehe ich, da ich nahe stehe": Filmic devices and literary subjectivity in Kafka's _Betrachtung_

##Introduction

###The Diaries: First entry

_Die Zuschauer erstarren, wenn der Zug vorbeifährt._ The bystanders go rigid as the train passes by. The first entry in Kafka's diaries, like many to follow, is a meditation on vision, and on the effect that vision has on the observer: inevitably, as if they were linked by the tyrannical gears of an invisible machine, the beholders of the passing train react to its motion by acquiring a stiff posture. Unlike some of the characters that we will meet later, these subjects are neither passengers (_Fahrgäste_) nor passers-by (_Vorüberlaufenden_): they are spectators (_Zuschauer_), whose only prerogative and function, within the boundaries of the brief annotation, is that of watching (_schauen_) the engine run in front of them.

As it has been noticed, this gnomic annotation easily reminds us of the mythical - and probably apocryphal - incident that accompanied the supposed first showing of one of the Lumière brothers' most popular shorts, _L'Arrivée d'un train en gare de La Ciotat_: as the filmed train threateningly approached the audience, from the other side of the screen, the spectators stood up and fled from the theater. Kafka's entry, therefore, would be inverting the notion at the basis of the notorious anecdote: the spectators do not run away - the spectators stay still.

A complete conflation of the two occurrences might, however, become misleading. Despite having been frequently quoted, the first entry of the _Diaries_ still deserves further consideration: the beholders in Kafka's train station and those attending the Lumières' show occupy different positions, and are apparently motivated by opposite intentions. In fact, we know very well why the spectators watching _La Ciotat_ would have fled, at least according to the legend: they were afraid of the vehicle rushing towards them. But what about the reason for which Kafka's _Zuschauer_ "go rigid"?
 
Fear could again be an obvious motivation, and one that would be paradoxically consistent with its filmic analog. The spectators on the platform, whom Kafka is supposedly describing, would very unlikely be placed right in front of the advancing engine, like the camera used by the Lumières: they would instead be watching the arrival from a side perspective. A slight sensation of fear for the fast mechanism, still rather unfamiliar at the time, would paralyze them in an attempt not to be swept away by its course: stasis is a spontaneous reaction to the anxiety of uncontrollable motion. Other explanations might be even more trivial: they are scanning the cars to look for their seat, or they are expecting a familiar face; they are simply holding to their luggage while preparing for the hasty activity of boarding the train.

We might, however, formulate a more profound and more pervasive interpretation for this  simple sentence, one that would link the automatism that it describes to the automatism that is inherent in any static observation of a dynamic object. A sort of contemplative mode is suddenly activated by the arrival of the train: the casual passengers, or bystanders, become watchers as the vehicle approaches the station. They can perceive the motion of the train, in its full faculties of energy and speed, because they are standing still on the immovable space of the platform; if they were, for instance, sitting on a second train, moving at the same velocity of the first train, its motion would be imperceptible. Their _erstarren_, the petrified _repose_ (_Ruhe_) produced by the only action that Kafka records about them, "going rigid", is the necessary condition to their _zuschauen_, to the watching of _motion_ (_Unruhe_). In this way, they eventually resemble more fully the actual - and not legendary - audience of _La Ciotat_: a still congregation of viewers, captivated by the projection of movement.

###From the _Diaries_ to _Betrachtung_

As we have mentioned, many of the annotations that the young Kafka collected in his journals before 1912, and which constitute almost half of his extant diaristic production, are comparable experiments in prose, similarly attempting to capture ephemeral and often inconspicuous glimpses of reality, with a special emphasis on the processes of the visible. Like this first entry, they have often been interpreted as a reflection on the contrasting modes of _photography_ and _cinema_, a dichotomy contiguous with the opposition between _repose_ and _motion_ (_Ruhe_, or _photography_, and _Unruhe_, or _cinema_). According to Carolin Duttlinger, for instance, this experimentation would have led Kafka to abandon an initial filmic impressionism, through which he tried to reproduce the endless dynamism of perception, in favor of a fragmentation of space into juxtaposed static images, which we could identify as photographic. Biographical evidence and literary production support this analysis: Kafka was certainly both a keen movie-goer and an attentive collector of photographs; his early publications undoubtedly possess a strong visual quality, while being peculiarly interested in problems of spectatorship and movement. 

These investigations converged in his first published book, _Betrachtung_, a collection of eighteen short stories which served as a sort of personal anthology of his work up to the year 1912. The title, _Betrachtung_, is a deverbal noun derived from _betrachten_, a word which means both _to view_ and _to consider_: this deliberate ambiguity might be translated into English expressions such as _contemplation_ or, perhaps more explicitly, _observation_. It is a singular form, indicating both an overall disposition and an ongoing process: each small prose - the longest occupies four pages, the shortest three sentences - does not constitute, in itself, a single _observation_; they are, rather, both the occurrences and the products of an infinite and indefinite attitude of _observation_.

Suspended between the ongoing temporality of its title and the instantaneous duration of its constitutive elements, _Betrachtung_ is a book which intimates a correspondence between the activity of the writer and the mechanical reproduction of gaze, achieved through a literary emulation of devices drawn from photography and film. The main purpose of this paper is, therefore, to investigate and to interpret the actual ways in which Kafka managed to translate filmic and photographic modes of acquisition into formal aspects of his prose.

##The three devices: framing, editing, and the point-of-view perspective 

###1. Framing

The constitutive unit that film and photography have in common is, of course, the _frame_ (or _shot_). A frame flattens the tridimensional experience of space, capturing a finite portion of reality from a specific point of view. In contrast to the automated reproduction that characterizes photographic media, the boundaries of a frame are intentionally established by a human subject, and they determine its uniqueness by delimiting the scope of the picture, while excluding everything else. Whenever the narrator of _Betrachtung_ explicitly adopts a restricted visual perspective, with varying degrees of stylistic emphasis, we may assume that Kafka's intention is that of evoking the literal edges of a frame.

From a basic standpoint, actual frames are pervasive in the small collection of _Betrachtung_. Mirrors, for instance, are featured in __The businessman__ (_Der Kafumann_), __Dresses__ (_Kleider_), and in the final short story, __Unhappiness__ (_Unglücklichsein_); an open door is, on the other hand, the recognizable frame from which spy on __The bachelor's lot__ (_Das Unglück des Junggsellen_). The most frequent manifestation of architectural framing in the book is nevertheless constituted by the ubiquity of the window: from the two short stories that feature it as their central topic, __Wool-gathering at the window__ (_Zerstreutes hinausschaun_, literally "watching outside while absent minded") and __The window on the street__ (_Das Gassenfenster_), to the uncomforting glance that, again from an open window, closes the melancholic __The way home__ (_Der Nachhausweg_). These physical structures represent, however, only a marginal, though blatant, aspect of Kafka's experimentation on the _frame_: __Children on the country street__ (_Kinder auf der Landstraße_), the first short story of the collection, emblematically integrates this motif, a window through which passers-by bother the young protagonist, with a complex series of more stylistically elaborate shots. We will often return to this initial piece, whose opening is, in itself, an ideal model for the _frame_.

> Ich hörte die Wagen an dem Gartengitter vorüberfahren, manchmal sah ich sie auch durch die schwach bewegten Lücken im Laub. [...]
> Ich saß auf unserer kleinen Schaukel, ich ruhte mich gerade aus zwischen den Bäumen im Garten meiner Eltern.

The visual boundaries of the _frame_, simultaneously limiting the protagonist and the reader's perception, are immediately emphasized: after having heard the noise of the carts, the narrator is barely able to discern them "through the slightly moving gaps in the leaves". This first arrangement of flexible apertures could already be understood as the infinitely small and ephemeral establishment of a _frame_; the peculiarity of this _frame_, however, is that it is moving, in the same way as the carts beyond it. We could, in fact, consider the combination of the moving leaves, the small shifting gaps, and the moving cars beyond them as the general spectacle for the children; this is a fascinating problematization of our notions of frame and spectacle: we can easily picture the child contemplating the interaction between the leaves and the cars. The essence is that the fixed subject of the sentence, the stable and invisible __Ich__ with which the book opens, is static: the motion belongs to everything that comes after the verb __sah__: the cars are passing by him (vorbeifahren) and the gaps through which they can be perceived are incessantly moving (__bewegten__); the observer is apparently static, the observed is dynamic in front of him. A concept of framing, however problematic, still persists: the cars are seen only occasionally and through the leaves because the subjective, contingent point of view of the child is what needs to be emphasized. We soon discover that the child is sitting on a paradoxically static small swing (_kleinen Schaukel_): it is a further focus on his condition of repose; he could be swinging - is what a child on a swing usually does - but he instead stopped to look through the foliage, or better, to look at the moving foliage through which the cars could be seen. The first sequence of verbs relating to the child, and to the narrator of the collection itself, is an essential definition of the act of _betrachtung_: Ich hörte - sah ich - ich saß - ich ruhte mich. We have therefore discovered the child in a state of fixed observation: he is on his swing, he has the faculty to swing back and forth, to experience the childish frenzy of movement, and instead he hears and looks, sitting and resting in a reposed position. Ruhen is of course the verb absociated to Ruhen, the repose that Duttlinger would immediately associate to photography; and yet, this is the attitude of a movie-goer: we look at the repose of the movie-goer, sitting quietly while observing movement outside; this is not an explicit opposition between photography and film, this is an exploration of the act of observation that, at most, utilizes both the dynamism of cinema and the stasis of photography.

Then, after more contemplation, we suddenly have an inversion in this practice: the child is no longer static, and the swing moves. How? Because a flock of "birds flew up like spray".

> Dann flogen vögel wie sprühend auf, ich folgte ihnen mit den Blicken, sah, wie sie in einem Atemzug stiegen, bis nicht mehr glaubte, daß sie stiegen, sondern, daß ich falle, und fest mich an den Seilen haltend, aus Schwäche ein wenig zu schaukeln anfing. Bald schaukelte ich stärker, als die Luft schon kühler wehte und statt der fliegenden Vögel zitternde Sterne erschienen.

In the first pages of Flaubert's Education Sentimentale, which remained Kafka's favorite novel for a long time (quotation needed), the narrator carefully analyzes the way in which the land is observed by the main character, Fréderic, as he leaves the shores of Paris on a ferry. Notoriously, the description of this departure transfers the motion of the observer to the observed: instead of describing how the vessel runs along the coast, Flaubert makes the coast run along the vessel.

> Insert Flaubert here.

Drawing from this experimental quality of realist fiction, Kafka creates a small, masterful instance of this inversion right in the first page of his first collection.

Panning was extremely rare in early cinema, although some directors were already placing their cameras on flying objects or running trams, in order to register the motion of a point of view together with the motion of the thing observed. Kafka is here slowly introducing us to the potential exhilaration of a moving point of view: the object that the child is trying to follow with his gaze is moving, so that his gaze has to move before that same object leaves the frame. We have no other option but picturing it as an actual enclosed frame: we are placed in the same position as the child, and we know that he won't be able to follow the flight of the flock without moving his eyes, or - probably - even his head. We understand his necessity of using his eyes, of _folgen mit den Blicken_, only if we understand that, if it had remained static, his point of view would have been insufficient. The expression "in einem Atemzug" is literally translated "with one breath", which creates some perplexity: does it mean "in one instant"? And what movement does it qualify, the flight of the birds or the gaze of the child? The German clearly associates it with the plural ascension of the birds - stiegen is a third person plural - but a flock of birds does not have breath, only a child does. Therefore, this motion is transferred from the observed object to the observer, and it instantiates a sort of mirroring movement in the observer and in the observed; the observer moves because the object that he was observing moved. This is different from everything that we have observed so far: it is different from the spectators watching the train and "going rigid", and it is different from what the child was doing at the beginning. By trying to condescend its object, the gaze of the observer reached a point when its object was outside of the frame defined by his point of view, and so it slowly moved to follow it. The flock of bids ascended, reached the limit of the observer's frame, and the gaze of the observer had to move to follow it. This adaptation anticipates a feature that we will examine later, that is the conformation of the observer to its object; and the projective push that an attempt to conform to a thought entails. However, this motion of following the flock reaches a paradox for which the observer has been absorbed by the motion belonging to the observed, which creates a peculiar inversion of perspective: the birds are fixed in the sky, and it is the subject that moves, not the object. This relates to our first hypothesis related to the motion of the train: what if we were sitting on a train while the train was moving, and what if the train on which we were was moving at the same speed as the train which we were looking at? We would not be able to perceive movement any longer. This brief paradox expresses precisely this concern: the birds are now static, and the subject is the one moving; one of the two has to stay fixed, the other has to move. This short paragraph stages precisely this transition: at the very beginning the observer is completely stable, looking at the double movement constituted by the shifting leaves creating mobile gaps against the fence through which running cars are perceivable; then he moves his sight when the birds ascend, so much that he gets the impression that they are fixed, while he is falling; he eventually starts swinging - becoming the mobile element of the equation - when the ascending birds are substituted by fixed, though flickering, stars.

Thus, Kafka defines the observation of movement through the opposition between a static and a moving object. Like in the short line that opens his _diaries_, the observation of motion is deemed impossible from a mobile perspective (hence the paradoxical stasis on the swing); there is then a paradoxical identity between the motion of the observed object and the motion of the gaze, which creates an inversion of perspective: the birds are fixed, the observer is moving - and in two opposite directions. Finally, when the observed object becomes entirely static - such as in the example of the fixed stars in the distant sky, the gaze is moving. In each case, observation is equivalent to motion, either in the observer or in the observed (but not in both). A small additional note: the opposition between "nicht mehr glaubte, daß sie stiegen, sondern, daß ich falle, is intensely subtle, and it probably needs a clarification - it derives from an extremely careful attention to the implications of observation.  It is the establishment, as we have said, of a complete inversion, introduced by the sondern: the subject changes in the same way as the motion described; it is a sort of active/passive dichotomy; or an instance of relativity. "Sondern" is a specifically German connector: differently than "aber", it introduces an opposition that is in complete alternative. It is _either_ one postulation _or_ the other. In synthesis, it is either the observed or the observed that are in motion, or that are perceived as being in motion (which is the same). It creates a sort of mirroring of one of the essential laws of phyisics: to any action corresponds a reaction. In this case, to the perceived act of raising in the air, corresponds a mutual act of _falling_. It is an illusion that is sought after; it precedes the actual motion of the swing, or perhaps it provokes it rather than anticipating it. Let us consider this more thoroughly: the inversion is introduced by a _bis_: until. It is a difference in __quantity__ that becomes a difference in __quality__: the observer is gradually following the birds more and more, _until_ it gets to the point when the motion is inversely transmitted to his subjectivity. We do not know whether the observer is actually moving at this point: he has been following the flock only _mit den Blicken_, with his sight (not even a physical connotation to this element: it's not the eyes or the pupil, it's the _sight_, the _gaze_: nothing else is moving but this silent, almost abstract faculty of his senses. This happens, as we have already seen, _in einem Atemzug_: in a breath, which is the first transference of a subjective - human - quality to the animal collectivity possessing, clearly, no such faculty; it is a second component in our equation: intensity of the movement (_wie sprühend_) and brevity of the contemplation (_in einem Atemzug_), followed by sight, provoke this reciprocal absortion by the watcher. Let us progress: the simple act of watching the flock for a short period of time produces this sort of vertigo - perceptive inversion of the motion, perceptive appropriation of the motion, inverted according to the physical principle of action/reaction; this vertigo provokes the impulse to hold still (_fest mich an den Seilen haltend_), but the immediate consequence is, conversely, one of actual motion. The almost imperceptible attempt to fix the watcher in a stable position is crucial - an attempt to stay still produces, instead, motion on the flexible set of the swing (_ein wenig_). This starts a more intense process of motion, which results in the motion of the watcher opposed to the motion of the object. The final vision is one of motion in stasis - zittern - and not of tremor. It is a masterful moment, which reveals an intense attention to the functioning of observation.

Attention to the dynamics of observation, brought to this extreme of detail, is one aspect of what we would call "framing" in this series of short narratives; as we have seen, the essential concern for Kafka is to show how the act of watching transfers a sensation of motion onto the watcher; and how observation of a mobile object usually produces an immobile observer. Other instances of this notion are frequent in the collection; in the small encounter described in __Passers-by__ (_Die Vorüberlaufenden__), for instance, the accidental spotting of a mysterious man running towards the observer creates a stasis that is framed with an explicit pictorial quality:

> Wenn man in einer Nacht durch eine Gasse spaziergeht, und ein Mann, von weitem schon sichtbar - denn die Gasse vor uns steigt an und es ist Vollmond -, uns entgegenläuft, so werden wir ihn anpacken, selbst wenn er schwach und zerlumpt ist, selbst wenn jemand hinter ihm läuft und schreit, sondern wir werden ihn weiterlaufen lassen.

The identity between the two instances is clear: a man is visible (_sichtbar_) from afar, a fact that is explained by the expansion of the context immediately surrounding him: the full moon and the sloping street, forming an actual frame at his feet and on his head; then the act of running towards us, and our immediate fixedness - we do not reciprocate the moment, because the principle is that we let stasis match motion.

Framing takes different shapes in _Betrachtung_. At times is, for instance, the observation of something that is entirely static, like in the descriptive short prose dedicated to __Dresses__ (_Kleider_): again through a syntactic choice, a relative clause, the closed are separated from the clothed people.

> Oft wenn ich Kleider mit vielfachen Falten, Rüschen und Behängen sehe, die über schönen Körper schön sich legen, dann denke ich, daß sie nicht lange so erhalten bleiben, sondern Falten bekommen [...].

Together with the recurrent "sondern" structure, that here introduces the hypothetical push of imagination which we will explore in the end of our work, the initial inversion is especially noteworthy: "dresses" constitute the direct object of vision, and the direct object of the verbal construction depending on the first person singukar _ich_ [...] _sehe_; included within this large clause, which the initial _Oft_ allows, are the _dresses_ with their characteristic richness: vielfachen Falten, Rüschen und Behängen; the wearers of the dresses, schönen Körper, are relegated to a subordinate phrase. The three features evidently distribute our observation of the object into three distinct frames: _Falten_ (creases) usually enrich the wider portions of a dress, such as the skirt; _ruffles_, or _Rüschen_, are usually positioned around the waist or the neck; _hangings_ [__?__], or _Behängen_, hang from the rims of the sleeves or of the bottom. We have, therefore, three different close-ups, juxtaposed in a quick transition of frames; a succession of stills that creates a perception of movement only through its rythm, a device that is conventional in literature. What matters here is the isolation of the clothing and the subsequent isolation of the details that constitute clothing. This appreciation of fabric is in fact mirrored by a second destructuring of vision, this time related to the wearers:

> Doch sehe ich Mädchen, die wohl schön und vielfach reizende Muskeln und Knöchelchen und gespannte Haut und Massen dünner Haare zeigen [...]

The process of isolation is therefore double: on one side we have the _Kleider_, on the other the _Mädchen_: the clothing and the wearer of the clothing have been separated by a contrasting syntactic chouce, and then subdivided into their constitutive elements. A sort of isomorphic structure is used here: a double isolation, followed by a tripartite deconstruction of the depicted topic. Once again, these are conventional rhetorical structures - ekphrasis in the first instance, the same sort of deconstruction of the female body that would constitute a lyrical blason in the second one; the explicit isolation of each detail, however, is what produces this sensation of a sequence of stills, or close-ups, which could be edited according to a specific rythm. Language is used as a zooming device, or as the chiaroscuro techniques of photography and film: they bring forth a detail while isolating another one; then they are juxtaposed in a sort of rythmical acceleration that produces both an impression of wholeness and an impression of motion.

At times the isolation and juxtaposition of details creates strange effects of proximity and distance, such as in the case of __Window on the street__ (_Das Gassfenster_); this is a small and curious example of what could be considered a literary perception of stereoscopic vision, with its "derangement of the conventional functioning of optical cues" (Crary 86).

> Wer verlassen lebt und sich doch hie und da irgendwo anschließen möchte, wer mit Rücksicht auf die Veränderungen der Tageszeit, der Witterung, der Berufsverhältnisse und dergleichen ohne weiteres irgendeinen beliebigen Arm sehen will, an dem er sich halten könnte, -der wird es ohne ein Gassfenster nicht lange treiben. Und steht es mit ihm so, daß er gar nichts sucht und nur als müder Mann, die Augen auf und ab zwischen Publikum und Himmel, an seine Fensterbrüstung tritt, und er will nicht und hat ein wenig den Kopf zurückgeneigt, so reißen ihn doch unten die Pferde mit in ihr Gefolge von Wagen und Lärm und damit endlich der menschlichen Entracht zu.

The most conspicuous optical alteration of this brief passage consists, of course, in the juxtaposition of the proximity of what the protagonist of the short story actually desires, the __ohne weiteres irgendeinen beliebigen Arm__, and what he actually sees from his window, pushing his own gaze _down under_ - _doch unten_. The first and the second line of the passage create two contrasting spaces: we first picture a window that faces the street _on the level of the street_, that is - at the right height to perceive an arm as if it were immediately close to the observer; then, this window is immediately pushed up, at a level that is instead projected onto the line between the soil and the sky (_zwischen Publikum und Himmel_). As he contemplates what lies very far in the horizon, or down below, the man obtains something that is as close and as tangible as an arm that he could actually reach and feel, or even hang to. We might return to this passage later, when we consider the contradiction between the projection of wish and the sensations offered by reality; in the meanwhile, it is also relevant to notice how the observer - his sight - creates an impossible space by the collation of his projected view and his actual view: it is what Kulesov notoriously suggested cinema could do. It is also important to remark that there is absolutely no human presence in the final lines of the short story - all that this silent man can see are horses, cars, and noise.

This passage will probably deserve a more attentive exploration later. Here it is not very productive.

[REMEMBER that the considerations on the _close-up_ can be associated to what Benjamin has to say about the peculiarities of cinema when they are associated to psychoanalysis.]

The elements that contribute to the idea of _framing_ in the short collection are therefore an explicit attention to the limits and the peculiarities of subjective view, as in the short passage that opens the collection in the story _Kinder auf der Landstrasse_, and an isolation and destructuring of details that creates a sort of rythmical sequence of stills, echoed in the syntactical structure of the descriptions, as in _Kleider). An exemplary combination of both moments consists for sure in the description of the woman that the narrator watches in __The passenger__ (_Der Fahrgast_). The whole short story is an experiment of _stasis_ in motion: like the child on the swing, the narrator is able to convey, and to perceive, a sense of stability while inhabiting an inherently, emphatically mobile setting: his sense of ceaseless movement should be double: on the one hand, he is on board of a tramway car - the soil is moving under his feet, the scenery is moving through the windows; on the other hand, his position is explicitly one of insecurity, existential mobility: the man is _vollständig unsicher in Rücksicht meiner Stellung in dieser Welt, in dieser Stadt, in meiner Familie_. There is a paradoxical inversion between the motion of the vehicle, and of the intellectual perception of what the narrator feels is shifting around him - in the concentrical progression from the world to the city to the family - and the fixedness of his point of view as a narrator. Rightly enough, the character is stable and standing, and it is the world that moves around him; the concentrical climax of this localization conveys the impression of wheels moving fast as they get more and more far from the observer. Everything is moving, except for the narrator - who is located with a stable sequence of spatial prepositions and adverbs "auf dieser Platform, an dieser Schlinge, von diesem Wagen". The sequence, which links together a prepositional adverb and a definite noun, features at its center the parallel succession of three deictics, which emphasize the stable location of the speaker even more - they locate his perspective within a specific contingency, an irrepetible contingency. It is an experiment in perspective, once again; the apex of motion around the observer equals his awareness of his fixedness and indifference to the world. He has become, through his point of view, the invisible axis around which the entire world might be spinning, not requiring anything from him. Notice that the first sequence, the concentrical climax of locations, features the same structure - the platform that sustains the narrator, the loop to which he hangs, the wagon on which he is running. This could even be considered as a climax proceeding in the opposite direction: we first had a motion from the world to the speaker, now we have a motion from the speaker to the world. It is this allineation of deictics and spatial determiners that conveys a sense of his position as a sort of invisible, and somehow indifferent axis. There is more: the move is extremely ambivalent. He is the anonymous passenger, the face in the crowd observed by Baudelaire day by day in his first experiences as a flâneur, and it is at the same time the invisible center of the universe, because we are suddenly approaching his subjectivity. That is, the literal meaning of this short passage seems to convey one sense, whereas the stylistical choices that have been used convey another: through the juxtaposition of sight and motion, the anonymous character has become the axis around which the world is revolving around him. The objective description has been absorbed by his subjectivity - in a sort of imaginary zoom, we have approached him from the remoteness of the world to the intimacy of his family - an invisible setting, a context to which he would be the only one to be completely aware.

The same trajectory from an objective to a subjective description is keenly conveyed in the short description that follows. As this passage closes, and the character perceives that the world is indifferently revolving around him, a lady enters the car.

> Sie ist schwarz gekleidet, die Rockfalten bewegen sich fast nicht, die Bluse ist Knapp und hat einen Kragen aus weißer kleinmaschiger Spitze, die linke Hand hält sie flach and die Wand, der Schirm in ihrer Rechten steht auf der zweiteriobersten Stufe. Ihr Gesicht ist braun, die Nase, an der Seiten schwach gepreßt, schließt rund und breit ab. Sie hat viel braunes Haar und verwehte Härchen an der rechten Schläfe. Ihr kleines Ohr liegt eng an, doch sehe ich, da ich nahe stehe, den ganzen Rücken der rechten Ohrmuschel und den Schatten an der Wurzel.

These two periods create an intensely sensual progression, which brings us nearer to both the intimacy of the observer, and the push, the inner drive of his desire, and the silent intimacy of the observed. The description seems to offer a sort of accelerated progression from the general to the detail, as if the gaze of the narrator were able to circle his object first, and to focus on one specific detail of her body later; it is, however, a very carefully designed motion: the prose construct this transference slowly, through a series of carefully designed frames, which create the impression of a slow adherence of gaze on the body of its object.  The first sentence begins with a full-body frame: we cannot see any specific detail, except for a general observation about the color of the woman's clothes, which are not described, or even mentioned, in their specific features. We only see a sort of black shilouette. The sight of the observer then follows a bottom-to-top progression, from the lower end of the skirt,and its _Rockfalten_, to the blouse, fastened, and the collar, whose top is white striped. The description created a sort of evanescent stasis - it is as if, through the narrator's insistent gaze, erotically charged in this explicit vertical discovery of her body, the woman had left the scene to be inspected within a sort of transcendent space; she becomes, like the main character, surprisingly still - her clothes do not move at all - "bewegen sich fast nicht" - and every detail conveys a perception of fixedness and fastness, including the shirt and the tight collar. In this abstract realm, the figure seems thus to be observable from every angle, so that the imaginary gaze describing her, whose moves are uniform with the breaks and connections of syntax, seems to be able to circle her, to embrace her entirety in a full circle: we therefore move from her left hand, which adheres carefully to the wall, to the umbrella in her right hand, which we follow to the second step (_zweitobersten Stufe_), which supports its weight. The contrast between the two subjects, however, establishes a sort of visual disparity, which seems to restitute the object to a definite perspective. The two hands are juxtaposed on a syntactical level, but they do not occupy the same grammatical space: only the left hand is a grammatical subject, whereas the subject of the second sentence is the same umbrella that leans on the step. Both elements are nevertheless used to convey, again, a sense of transcendent stability - they are secure against the wall, vertically, and on the step, horizontally - or vice versa. This disparity between subjects, however, for which the description insists first on part of the woman's body, then on one of her accessories, seems to suggest a visual disparity: perhaps the narrator is able to see her left hand better than her right hand, and she would therefore be standing in front of him as a sort of slightly tilted side perspective. The opening of the second sentence seems to contradict this statement: the narrator is suddenly capable of looking at her _Gesicht_; but he only focuses on her complexion, giving no detail about her traits other than the shape of her _Nase_, pressed on the sides and round at the tip. The description of her hair is more specific, and stresses only one side of her head, the right one. We slowly understand that the observer is standing in a specific position right now: he has a better access to the left hand, the right temple, and the back of the head, since the hair is described with more accuracy than the visage. The last detail constitutes a coronation of this process of concentration of the narrator's gaze: the parallel hands that were alternatively described in the previous sentence are here matched by an asymmetrical look on _Ihr kleines Ohr_, a single small ear, observed from a specific perspective, existing as if there was no other possible ear. The gaze becomes insistingly singular _doch sehe ich, da ich nach stehe_, and at the same time intensely focused on the most infinitely minute detail, the small shadow at the root of her earshell. From the general outlook on her figure, absorbed in the third person singular of an omniscient narrator, the focus shifted to the most explicitly singular point of view. The dichotomy is understandably between an objective description and a subjective description: the narrator on the one hand and the reality that he can observe on the other. The first few lines of the short story make this anonymous observer the silent axis of his universe; he is the static center of a revolving system of concentrical wheels, which first expand towards him, and then expand directly from him; while his literal thoughts express a sense of loss and superfluity, the style employed reveals that he considers himself, in reality - or that, in reality, the narrator describes him as - the center of the world that he inhabits. Therefore, when in the end the narrator looks at this other passenger and wonders - why are not speaking about yourself, about the wonder of your own appearance? The narrator is wondering about why the object of his contemplation does not become herself a producer of a discourse around herself, like he did; she should simply open her mouth and begin an analogous utterance that centralizes her point of view as the axis around which the world is spinning. This opportunity is, however, denied by the fact that the reality that this _Mädchen_ occupies is, in itself, absorbed by the reality uttered by the narrator: it was only apparently an objective reality, and in fact the product of a subjective gaze on reality. She does not say anything alike, or of the same sort (_dergleichen_) because her reality is incorporated within the observer's reality. The final line is therefore an ultimate assertion of a limit, the limit of the perspective - of the subjective frame - in which the entirety of the observed reality has been enclosed, and which the characters cannot be aware of. The second reason for which the _Mädchen_ cannot utter a discourse around herself, or a discourse that is of the same sort as the one pronounced by the narrator, is that the gaze produced by the narrator is something subjective, not objective; it is something that cannot be understood or perceived by the _Mädchen_. This final example presented all of the most peculiar features of the definition of a frame: it is intensely aware of the characteristic of vision, and of the possible illusions that an awareness of optical devices can produce - in this case the paradoxically static observer placed at the center of an intensely mobile environment, both literally and metaphorically; it is aware of its limits and boundaries, which are explicited in the moment when the gaze of the observer shifts from the shiluette of the woman who enters the tram to the infinitely minute detail of her ear, only accessible to his gaze, and singularly accessible to his gaze; it postulates a dichotomy between a static observer and a mobile observed object, which can occasionally be inverted; it isolates details of the observed object, through the use of a syntactic chiaroscuro techinque that carefully chooses which elements to highlight, or simply light, like in this case the hand. The frame is a consciously limited detail that can be isolated from its context, and that works dynamically in creating a series of optical illusions and plays on the dichotomy between objective and subjective. A frame is, finally, an impressionistic definition of the subjective; differently from Flaubert, Kafka does not shape the entire reality of his narration around the peculiarities of a subjective gaze; he shows the alterations that occur at the level of a single individuality, and plays with the excesses of an individual's vision. His word is not pictorically impressionistic strictu sensu, unlike Flaubert's: the environment does not bend to the gaze of an anonymous observer, such as the narrator, or better, it does not achieve its impressionistic qualities by means of an excessive realism; on the contrary, it stresses subjectivity in a playful manner, it creates an optical illusion around the notions of subjectivity and vision. It is not impressionism as much as it is an optical illusion, like an anamorph from the Early Modern period, changing according to the point of view of the observer.

After framing, a second powerful notion that seems to be present in this early experiments is a certain underdstanding of _editing_. Let us think about the previous examples: in both _Kleider_ and _Der Fahrgast_ an idea of isomorphism and rythm was conveyed by the syntactical structure used for different angles of the description.

Editing, "the most widely discussed film technique", was undergoing an intense process of evolution in this epoch, defining the essential ways in which a story would be designed for, and delivered through, the cinematic medium. Between the beginning of the century and the core of the 1910s, cinema started to understand the ways in which cutting and stitching together different shots could contribute to the illusion of narrative, temporal, and spatial progression. A definite grammar of editing strategies was progressively devised by the early authors of cinema: the way in which connections could be used to enhance or to jeopardize an illusory perception of reality, an element of verisimilitude, was therefore established by the end of this period. As Bordwell explains in his now widespread approach to the subject, editing usually possesses four different functional aspects: it can be used to institute "Graphic relations between shot A and shot B; rythmic relations between shot A and shot B; spatial relations between shot A and shot B, temporal relations between shot A and shot B." Some of this observations on cinema derive, of course, from the way in which written language has been handling with this issues for centuries before the invention of film: film of course inherited this techinques that were already central for the way in which writing organized its narrative structure. The isomorphic graphical relations that two shots can possess in cinema, between two round objects at the center of the screen, for instance, or between two red objects in the upper right corner of the frame, are already present in any rhetorical device that emphasizes the aspect of the signifier to that of the signified, prosodic and metrical recourses such as anaphora, alliteration, or even rhyme. Cinema absorbed and remediated this notions of repetition, and Kafka unsurprisingly reproposes them in the syntactical structuring of these short stories: examples such as the three central deictics in the first part of _Der Fahrgast_ abound in his writing. A rythmical connection is similarly assimilable to metrical patterns, which similarly derived from music.

A clear example of a rythmic acceleration in Kafka's _Betrachtung_ is the short story entitled _The spur-of-the-moment stroll_, or __Der Plötzliche Spaziergange__: in this short piece, the motion that is so peculiar to the collection is conveyed and reproduced by a series of syntactic choices:

> Wenn man sich am Abend endgültig entschlossen zu haben scheint, zu Hause zu bleiben, den Hausrock angezogen hat, nach dem Nachtmahl beim beleuchtetem Tisch sitzt und jene Arbait oder jenes Spiel vorgenommen hat, nach dessen Beendigung man gewohnheitsgemäß schlafen geht, wenn draußen ein unfreundliches Wetter ist, welches das Zuhausebleiben selbverständlich macht, wenn man jetzt auch schon so lange bei Tisch stillgehalten hat, daß Weggehen allgemeines Erstaunen hervorrufen müßte, wenn nun auch schon das Treppenhaus dunkel und das Haustor gesperrt ist, und wenn man nun trozt alledem in einem plötzlichen Unbehagen aufsteht, den Rock wechselt, sofort straßenmäßig angezogen erscheint, weggehen zu müßen erklärt, es nach kurzem Abschied auch tu 

The structure of this short story is articulated around the anaphoric enumeration of the conditions that produce the subitaneity of the same stroll; these conditions are introduced by a series of "wenn" subordinate clauses, which not only create a definite spatial and temporal transition, but define a specific rythimcal pattern. The short prose describes the moment when an anonymous man takes the transforming decision, against sleepiness, habit, and odd weather, to leave his room and his house to enjoy a stroll in the open air. The decision is incapsulated within an elaborate single sentence, introduced by a number of subordinate clauses starting with the subjunctive preposition _wenn_: five before the decision to walk out, and four after it. Each _wenn_ is in fact the definition of a frame: the first one puts the impersonal subject at his table, at evening and after dinner, then a peek at the inclement weather outside, then a peek at the surprised company inside, and at the dark staircase and at the closed door that separate the man from the street. The first five subordinate clauses, therefore, depict a series of frames that are progressively less elaborate, and therefore progressively shorter: it is as if the time devoted to each frame became progressively shorter as the decision to take the stroll becomes progressively clearer: the first subordinate clause, setting the context of the individual sitting at the table, the dress hanging from the coat-hanger, the chair close to the table, the candle lit and a game or a piece of work on the desk, contains a total of four subordinate verbs; the second and the third one, devoted to the inclement weather outside and to the calm company inside, define a parallel subordination of one clause each, the fourth one only a simple third person verb, _ist_. It is a small masterful move: the five subordinate clauses, introduced by _wenn_, that lead to the abrupt decision to leave the house, are progressively shorter and less detailed; the decision is conveyed by a series of five short clauses, and followed by four other subordinates describing the condition of freedom experienced by the subject. The short story is therefore constituted by two symmetrical sequences of progressively shorter conditional subordinates, which are interrupted by a brief description of the actual decision to leave the house. A sense of acceleration is conveyed by the sequence of shorter and shorter clauses, and a sense of liberation and breath by the last ones. The first half of the sentence isolates the main character in a series of progressively shorter and progressively less detailed clauses, which describe his posture at the table, his immediate sorroundings, the weather outside of the window and the company of calm overlookers around him, and it briefly closes on the obstacles that separate the the character from the sudden impulse to leave, suggesting a sense of entrapment and uneasiness. They describe the objective condition of stasis in which the character finds himself: he is captured within a setting of habitual gestures and poses, by what is externally expected from him, and therefore the frames and the succession of shots progressively leaves his point of view to focus on the details that separate him from the assumed freedom constituted by the outside world; they are a series of static portraits describing his objective position in space and the habitual expectations that his sorroundings might have about him. The style of the narration, however, and the syntactic choices used to convey this sense of enclosure, support an opposite feeling of dynamism and focus, which is then matched by the sequence of sudden, brief decisions used to grasp and express his liberation; the sense that the _volta_ wishes to convey is, appropriately, one of abruptness and antithesis; the clauses become shorter immediately after the decision, and the number of words separating each verb from each other becomes smaller; it is a more concitate, more explicit rythm the one that brings the actor to the sudden, and subjective, resolution to motion; after having pushed him outisde, this motion finally reaches his intimacy and his satisfaction at the decision that he has taken: the subsequent set of frames are no longer visual, but instead depict an inner condition of self-reliance and positive determination, ending in the expectancy, the infinite promise of the open - with the last short clause of the section, __und wenn__ _man so die langen Gassen hinläuft_, hurrying along the infinite street that lies open in front of him. We are concerned, here, with the contrast between the literal sense of the first few clauses and the sense of acceleration implied in the visual aspect of framing and syntax. The first half of the prose, leading to the sudden decision, is what matters the most to our analysis.

Syntactical density often conveys this sense of rythm: shorter subordinate clauses have, as a consequence, a shorter distance between each verb; together with the visual aspect of the frames, which carefully define a dichotomy between objective reality and subjective perception, and which bring the point of view either closer to or further from the character or the narrator, these stylistical choices often contradict the literal content of a short story, creating unexpected impressions of motion or stasis, that might suit or not the actual content of a story.

The way home (__Der Nachhausweg__) seems to be an experiment in the coexistence of framing and editing in the definition of a subjective rythm that might contrast with the actual rythm of objective reality. In the short story, a stroller is watching the changing context that surrounds him. It is an explicit experiment in cinematic perspective, one where the contrast between literal meaning and the force of stylistic choices is perhaps less perceivable, but a substantial one nevertheless.

> Ich marschiere und mein Tempo ist das Tempo dieser Gassenseite, dieser Gasse, dieses Viertels. Ich bin mit Recht verantwortlich für alle Schläge gegen Türen, auf die Platten der Tische, für alle Trinksprüche, für die Liebespaare in ihren Betten, in den Gerüsten der Nebauten, in dunklen Gassen an die Häusermauer gepreßt, auf den Ottomanen der Bordelle.

The first observation that we can make about this short passage is that, again, motion belongs to the observer and not to the observed object. This discrepancy is the radical element of Kafka's prose at this moment, the one which would make us propend for a reading of this collection that privileges cinema to photography: photography, both in its perusal and in its actual production, involves to still subjects, an observer and an observed object that stay perfectly still. It is impossible that the fixed machine of the photographic camera can actually absorb movement: it cannot move while working, and its subject must stay still to be photographed. Film, on the other hand, always implies this dichotomy: the camera might be moving, or the observed object might be moving; when experienced, cinema is always experienced by a fixed observer watching a dynamic spectacle placed in front of him or her. The same is happening here, like in the first line of Kafka's diaries: the __Tempo__ that the observer is able to project against the objects perceived during his march is not the _Tempo_ of their actual activity, but the _Tempo_ of their rapid succession in time, produced by his own movement. All of the objects that the observer describes are perfectly still, their motion is only existent in the succession allowed by syntactic structuring, punctuation, and juxtaposition. There is no verb in these objective phrases: they constitute fixed stills in time and space, tied together by their alternation and the careful adjectivation and system of prepositions that frame them. They are static objects existing in space, defined first by three deictic adjectives, then by three prepositions introduced by _für_, finally by three spatial complements introduced by _in_ and _auf_. The subjectivity of the narrator rythmically embraces each of its objects, absorbing them into a rapid impressionistic sequence.

A similar example, explored by _Duttlinger_ in her chapter on the collection in her __Introduction__, is _Wanting to be a Red Indian_ (Wunsch, Indianer zu werden): the short piece presents again an acceleration conveyed by a sequence of pictorial frames segmented by parallel syntactical choices: like the _Spur-of-the-moment stroll_, it begins with the conditional "Wenn", which is amplified in a series of short clauses which temporarily suspend the resolution of the condition, creating an impression of suspense and acceleration, which is followed by two symmetrical alternatoons between a "bis man" and a "denn es gab", and that is concluded by an "und kaum". 

[__NOTE__: here we might actually articulate this section more carefully by describing the alteration of _space_ produced in the brief __Das Gassenfenster__ and the alteration of time produced in the contemplation on the street.]

Syntax is therefore often used to conttect static stils in the short stories of _Betrachtung_; the connections between stills create parallelisms, velocity, impression, motion; they are used to link different shots together into a single flow of motion, subjective impression, parallelisms and contrasts. The frames that, as we have seen, constitute the body of the brief encounter retold in _Passers-by_ are similarly linked by a series of subjunctive conntectors. The circumstance of passers-by, however, is noticeably different: the series of shots of the introductory paragraphs is then followed by a consecutive paragraph, introduced by the connector "Dann", whose body is no longer a series of fulfilled or unfulfilled conditions, but instead a series of conjectures: 'vielleicht' the visible person at the end of the street has some evil intentions, perhaps he is trying to hurt the other, and the narrator would get involved in a violent encounter, perhaps nothing of the sort is actually happening. We will later return to the way in which this series of images is in fact an instance of the "imaginary push" that is the central objective of the collection.

The frame is, as we have seen, the constitutive element of these short stories: it is the description of an object which presupposes a disparity between a static observer and a dynamic observed, or vice versa; it is a description which prominently exposes its own boundaries, the edges of the frame; it is a description that puts together different planes of reality, in a sort of perspective flattening that at times produces a sensation of estrangement. These shots are tied together by syntactic devices that emphasize attributes of graphic analogy, spatial and temporal difformity, and rythm. We feel, however, that the major intuition of this collection belongs to the specific attributes that filmic editing attributes to the first person subjective shot. In short, the use of this filmic device presupposes that, in order to create a sense of identification with a character in a film, the director and the editor will alternate shots of the objects observed by the main characters with shots that register the character's reactions; this system, based on reverse shots, is a foundational device for the production of emotive reactions in the spectator. The reverse point-of-view shot is a foundational tool of film editing.

Kafka displays a clear intuition of the potentialities of this medium in his initial short story, __Kinder auf der Landstrasse__. As we have seen, the story opens with the attentive description of what a child sees from his swing, while resting or playing. At the beginning of the story, we have only a minor intuition about this character's identity: we are sharing his subjective point of view, but we are unable to see him yet - with the exception of a brief mention of his silent rest "on our little swing". This only happens in the subsequent paragraph:

> Bei Kerzenlicht bekam ich mein Nachtmahl. Oft hatte ich beide Arme auf der Holzplatte und, schon müde, biß ich in mein Butterbrot. Die stark durchbrochenen Vorhänge bauschten sich im warmen Wind, und manchmal hielt sie einer, der draußen vorüberging, mit seinen Händen fest, wenn er mich besser sehen und mit mir reden wollte. Meistens verlöschte die Kerze bald und in dem dunklen Kerzenrauch trieben sich noch eine Zeitlan die versammelten Mücken herum. Fragte mich einer vom Fenster aus, so sah ich ign an, als schaue ich ins Gebirge oder in die bloße Luft, und auch ihm war an einer Antwort nicht viel gelegen.

Like the intrusive observer at the window, the reader is here granted a glimpse at the young narrator of the story. The billowing curtains of this brief vision resemble the moving foliage of the opening; but this time we are watching the watcher instead - a desire to know, and to get closer to the small protagonist. It is a sort of close up - only the upper half of this young creature would be visible at this table, while he eats sleepily into his bread and butter. The exchange between the intrusive observer and the young narrator is entirely conveyed through their reciprocal looking, gazing, staring. It is an attempt to penetrate the frame, to get closer to the watcher, to appropriate that specific point of view. Kafka adopts here an interesting strategy to grant this point of view to the reader, to finally let him observe the watcher, the narrator, the protagonist, in action - as he moves. He places an actual observer within the story, and he creates a sort of resistance between the observed narrator and the attempt to look at him that is entirely based, fittingly, on the capacity of sight and on its denial. The child sits at this table, he is again enframed by the pane of the window, and visible in a sort of upper-body close-up; we get close to him to interrogate him, in an interrogation that is actually an exploration and an appropriation of his own gaze.

Who is this anonymous "someone" spying on the child as he consummates his dinner? We then understand that this observer, with whom we are sharing the same sort of curiosity for the gaze of the narrator, of the main character, is in fact another child. The purpose of the entire short story seems in fact to be an attempt to recover a lost gaze, the gaze of a child, through the observation of a child and of what a child sees and does. The real focus of the short story is this resitution of an innocent point of view, of an estatic point of view, capable of restituting the innocence of motion to gaze. This observer therefore acquires the features of the child that he had been observing through the same act of observing; he looks at the child, he tries to penetrate his point of view; in the reciprocal, mute questioning that happens at that moment the two become part of the same group. The passage is immensely productive: there is a penetration of the space of the frame, immediately following - "If he then vaulted in over the sill" - __Sprang dann einer über die Fensterbrüstung__: the exchange of point of views, mediated by the framing of the reaction, institutes an empathic link that in fact breaks the form of the very frame; this can therefore be penetrated, like the gaze of the observer, and overcome. This exchange produces the first change in the person of the narrator - from the first person singular of the beginning we switch to a first person plural: the sequence of observations and observers has produced a complete incorporation of the reader within the context of the story, within the narration being experienced and retold by the narrator. A progression of frames transforms then the contemplative work of the opening, with its alternation between shots of the watcher and shots of the thing being watched, into a new objectivity: it is as if, through this passage from the eyes of the narrator to the eyes of the reader, the subjectivity retold in the opening had become a new objectivity. This progression is then emphasized by the impersonal subject of the central section: the "we", which was still a definite point of view in its juxtaposition of frames, becomes an impersonal "man". The reality described in the short story, that the narrator had tried to reincorporate, to enucleate and to restitute to the reader, knows now no boundaries: through its transference to the first obserer, who was identified with both the reader and a member of the group, the first person singular has become a first person plural: we are an anonymous child among child, or better - our gaze is participating in their games and in their perception of reality, suspended between the games among ditches and slopes. Then this subjective but collective reality becomes an absolutely objective reality: the statements that belonged to an isolated group among which we were trying to incorporate ourselves are now completely impersonal, objective facts, that we have no option but to share. Once it gets to this core of identification and recreation of a childlike objectivity, once the gaze of the small protagonist has been completely absorbed by the writing and by the reader, in a moment of stasis experienced while lying down in a ditch and watching the moon and the rustling foliage, the short story progressively returns to its starting point: it moves back to a first person plural, "we", and then to the first person singular, "I". We are now observing this character from afar, as he leaves the forest and the countryside for the city. The child is no longer sharing is point of view with the other children: he is no longer visible for them, and therefore for us. We only see the "paths that led back into the forest" from afar - we understand that the child is leaving but we no longer share his point of view, because we can no longer watch him watching. The moment of identification required the sort of intense mirroring of sight that was produced in the moment of play by the frantic association of all the children.

Gaze therefore functions as a mode of transference in the collection; it is the way in which the narrator produces modes of identification between the reader and the characters that inhabit his literary world. In each one of the cases that we have observed so far, the point-of-view shot, alternated with a shot registering the reaction of the narrator, creates the modes of identification that were peculiar to every chapter of the collection. The basic way in which Kafka instantiates this dialectic between observer and observed is usually through the motion and repose dialectic: a static observer observing a dynamic object, or a static object being observed by a dynamic observer. This reversal of perspective, this specularity between the two moments, is the way in which Kafka explores this problem most commonly. Framing and editing are used to convey this antithetical impressions.

Let us consider again what happens in "passers-by": the main character is walking along the street; he sees two people walking to each other. We see what he sees, than we register his reaction: paralisis. Like in the sentence that opens the diaries, movements provokes repose in the observer; repose is the paradoxical response that is produced in whoever is observing an object in motion. This places us in the position of the observer: like in the progressive passages that define the progression of __Kinder auf der Landstraße__, we have become part of a collectivity, and this collectivity is then expanded onto reality - a subjective perspective has become our perspective, then the only perspective. In a way, this move is what leads to Flaubert's impressionism. The paradox to which Flaubert arrives is that the shores of Paris are moving while the boat is standing still; Kafka does not get to this extreme at the beginning, but he explores the passages that can lead observation to this paradox. He is using cinematic means to explore this condition. In any case, the two characters are observed by the narrator; the narrator arrests, and we are now sharing his point of view because, through the establishment of the repose/motion dynamic, we have now registered both the object that had been observed and the observer's reaction. We have absorbed it, it is now part of our personal perception of reality - better still, it has moved from a personal perception of reality to an impersonal understanding of it. We have to understand that the move is tripartite: subjective gaze, collectivity - as if the camera had been placed right behind the observer, his shoulders still visible, and objectivity - the third stage. Kafka knows well that an omniscient narrator is an artifact; that fiction has to restitute the notion of ominscient narrator through the alternation of gaze and response. In any case, as soon as the two men have been seen, and the narrator has reacted to their presence with the surprising response of stasis, a subsequent paragraph clarifies the conditions in which this encounter is happening: it is night, and the two people are visible, and a series of vielleicht projects a series of conjectures - the syntactic model of juxtaposing frames is now being used for something different than usual: to express a series of hypotheses about the two men running towards each other. The narrator wonders, or better, the options that are consistent with what the narrator is wondering about are presented to us as a sequence of possible instances of reality, each paratatctically adjacent to the previous one. Once the reader has incorporated the point of view of the narrator, once his point of view has been integrated in the texture of reality that is the omniscience of an impersonal narrator, it is possible to use the conventions of vision not only for what is visible, both subjectively and, through an expansion of subjectivity, objectively; the framing and the editing of reality, incorporated through the interplay produced by responsive, reciprocal, point-of-view shots, are used to express what is invisible, what is only conjectured. These sequence of "vielleicht" are observations that are produced by the observer, they are figments that become visible for the reader because they are possible for the observer as well.

Vielleicht, vielleicht, vielleicht. This is the motion, the rythm, that this short story eventually faces us with: a rythm produced by the activity of thought and conjecture, an activity produced by a static observer who is not only contemplating the mobile reality placed right in front of him, but the mobile reality that is possible within himself, as a projection of his fantasies. He is seeing the invisible, and we are able to see the invisible with him.

Let us return to the most conspicuous forms of editing that we have encountered in the narrative: they all start with a series of hypothetical conditions, "wenn", "wenn", "wenn": it was the rythm of frames, increasing of decreasing, and drawing us closer to the narration, pushing us towards the narration, opening up a space where our expectations could have been turned into a projection. The space of the reiterated "wenn" is the space of an expectation: each definer of a condition makes us wonder more about its potential fulfillment. We are expecting a closure and a conclusion, therefore we wonder every time more. The acceleration of the syntactical rythm coincides with an acceleration of our thought process. We are expecting the - denn - the clause that will reveal the consequence of this reiterated hypothetical mode. Therefore, in the intensification of rythm and in the delay in expressing its fulfillment, we experience a sense of suspense, which provides the text with the possibility of making those projections even more powerful. This motion of hypothetical understandings coincides with the motion of the cinematic projection, with the acceleration of stills that allows for the existence of cinema itself.

If Kafka had been sitting in that Parisian theater where Ciotat was being shown, he would have probably been more concerned about his observation of the spectators than about the spectacle itself. Kafka would have been looking at the watchers, not at the show.

This short piece will be jumping a lot from story to story; apologies for the occasional confusion. We believe, however, that the experience of __Betrachtung__ is substantially unitary and consistente, belonging to a series of explorations that could easily be referred or attributed to the same individual and in the same setting. We as the reader who might feel unfamiliar with the short collection to picture the various short stories that we will mention as the individual chapters of the same erratic narrative; a narrative that is purposedly fragmentary, erratic and unfinished, but nevertheless produced by the same observer.

[This could be kept for the end.] There is, finally, the collocation of this same observation in a diaristic production: Kafka is observing the observers; Kafka is among the spectators of the moving train, but he does not move with them; instead, the exceptionality of this small observation lies precisely in the fact that, as the bystanders on a station platform, we would usually only be looking at the train, and not at the other bystanders; Kafka is the observer observing the observer. More: he registers this small observation in a note that we will read, and the movement of the train, contrasting with the stillness of the observers, will be also contrasting the stillness of our reading practice - on a couch, with an open book in our hands. And more - think about the small dynamic action of writing down this small thought in ink; think about the way in which this contrasts with the stillness of the printed word, and the stillness of the read word. <-__CRUCIAL.__ 
